Update Glimmer Template Truthiness Semantics (#861)
emberjs/rfcs: 0000-update-glimmer-template-truthiness-semantics.md

---
stage: accepted
start-date: 11/16/2022
release-date: 
release-versions:
teams: # delete teams that aren't relevant
  - framework
  - learning
  - steering
  - typescript
prs:
  accepted: # update this to the PR that you propose your RFC in
project-link:
---

<!--- 
Directions for above: 

stage: Leave as is
start-date: Fill in with today's date, 2032-12-01T00:00:00.000Z
release-date: Leave as is
release-versions: Leave as is
teams: Include only the [team(s)](README.md#relevant-teams) for which this RFC applies
prs:
  accepted: Fill this in with the URL for the Proposal RFC PR
project-link: Leave as is
-->

# Update Glimmer Template Truthiness Semantics

## Summary

> Update truthiness semantics from handlebar's version to javascript's version to allow for typescript to work as users would expect it to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide a path for Glimmer templates to switch away from classic Handlebars truthiness to JavaScript’s truthiness. This will align our templating language with users' expectations and make teaching easier. It will also allow TypeScript features like type narrowing to work as users would expect it to with keywords like `{{and}}` or `{{or}}`.
```

## Motivation

Due to handlebars supporting a different truthiness semantics than javascript, typescript cant function like users would expect it to. 

> By aligning HTMLBars version of truthiness semantics with the wider javascript community, type checking will function as users expect. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By aligning Glimmer's version of truthiness semantics with the wider javascript community, type checking will function as users expect. 
```

> To give an example of why this is an issue we can use the `{{and}}` operator. Right now we have a choice without changing the implementation of truthiness semantics in our templates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To give an example of why this is an issue we can use the `{{and}}` operator. Under the current Glimmer semantics, we can handle TypeScript in one of two ways:

1) `{{and}}` compiles to `&&` which will allow TS to lie to us about what is safe and what isn't (and will cause compile time errors) but WILL allow for type guards and narrowing to work

> 2) `{{and}}` compiles to `and()` which will allow truthy and falsy values to respect handlebars version of truthy and falsy, but wont allow for the types to be correct

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2) `{{and}}` compiles to `and()` which will allow truthy and falsy values to respect handlebars version of truthy and falsy, but wont allow for type guards and narrowing
```

Our definition of falsy would then become `type Falsy = false | 0 | '' | null | undefined;` as compared to handlebars version of `Falsy = false | 0 | '' | null | undefined | [];`

### {{and}}
Takes at least two positional arguments. Raises an error if invoked with less than two arguments. It evaluates arguments left to right, returning the first one that is not truthy (by javascript's definition of truthiness) or the right-most arguments if all evaluate to truthy. This is equivalent to the {{and}} helper from ember-truth-helpers. Doing this would allow `{{and}}` to compile down to `&&` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect.

### {{or}}
Takes at least two positional arguments. Raises an error if invoked with less than two arguments. It evaluates arguments left to right, returning the first one that is truthy (by javascript's definition of truthiness) or the right-most argument if all evaluate to falsy. This is equivalent to the {{or}} helper from ember-truth-helpers. Doing this would allow `{{or}}` to compile down to `||` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect.

### {{not}}

> Unary operator. Raises an error if invoked with more than one positional argument. If the given value evaluates to a truthy value (by javscript's definition of truthiness), the false is returned. If the given value evaluates to a falsy value (by javascript's definition of truthiness) then it returns true. This is equivalent to the {{not}} helper from ember-truth-helpers. Doing this would allow `{{not}}` to compile down to `!` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect.

Reviewer 2: Maybe still strange? I'm unsure. We definitely should support `{{not undefined}}` but I'm not sure about `{{not}}`.

> Unary operator. Raises an error if invoked with more than one positional argument. If the given value evaluates to a truthy value (by javscript's definition of truthiness), the false is returned. If the given value evaluates to a falsy value (by javascript's definition of truthiness) then it returns true. This is equivalent to the {{not}} helper from ember-truth-helpers. Doing this would allow `{{not}}` to compile down to `!` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect.

Reviewer 3: I would tend to not throw if invoked without arguments (`{{(not)}}`). But from typing perspective the argument should be required. And we might want to have a linting rule forbidding argumentless `{{(not)}}`.

I don't see much value in throwing. Implementation complexity should be the same. But we should use types and linting to push people towards `{{false}}` instead.

> Unary operator. Raises an error if invoked with more than one positional argument. If the given value evaluates to a truthy value (by javscript's definition of truthiness), the false is returned. If the given value evaluates to a falsy value (by javascript's definition of truthiness) then it returns true. This is equivalent to the {{not}} helper from ember-truth-helpers. Doing this would allow `{{not}}` to compile down to `!` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect.

Reviewer 2: I like @jelhan's solution here.

Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Uses triple equal version of javascript equality. Doing this allows for `{{eq}}` to compile down to `===` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect

### {{neq}}
Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Uses triple not equal version of javascript equality. Doing this allows for `{{neq}}` to compile down to `!==` and give us the correct type safety and narrowing that users would expect

### {{lt}}
Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Equivalent of `<` in Javascript.

### {{lte}}
Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Equivalent of `<=` in Javascript.

### {{gt}}
Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Equivalent of `>` in Javascript.

### {{gte}}
Binary operation. Throws an error if not called with exactly two arguments. Equivalent of `>=` in Javascript.

### Migration Plan
1. Ship comparison helpers `and`, `or`, `not` with existing equality and truthiness semantics (they currently match `if` and `unless` truthiness semantics)

> 2. Ship types which match that and document why they work they way they do. Acknowledge that this wont work for TS users in they way they would expect and why.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Ship types which match that and document why they work the way they do. Acknowledge that this wont work for TS users in the way they would expect and why.
```

> 3. Ship ability to opt into new behavior for `and`, `or`, `not`, `if` and `unless` (Following JS truthiness semantics)

Reviewer 3: How would that opt-in look like? Would be great if you could do more in detail for the migration story in general.
